---
layout: post
title: "Data Skeptics WSJ MeetUp"
date: 2014-01-15 12:17
comments: true
categories: [MeetUp, DataSkeptics]
author: Mark Veronda
---


Happy New Year, World!  I have been attending a lot of MeetUps related to data and have been learning a lot along the way.  The most recent MeetUp I attended was the [NYC Data Skeptics Society](http://www.meetup.com/The-NYC-Data-Skeptics-Meetup/events/156526602/)* on January 14 hosted at Huffington Post's headquarters in NYC.  I felt it was appropriate to share with the world some of the lessons learned and will continue this as a series of posts based on the MeetUps I attend as interesting things come along.

In addition to all the MeetUps, last month I read an excellent and inspiring book called ["Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think"](http://www.amazon.com/Big-Data-Revolution-Transform-Think-ebook/dp/B009N08NKW/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1389828747&sr=8-1&keywords=big+data), written by Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Kenneth Cukier.  I bring this up because there were some ideas and concepts from there that came up and were related during the MeetUp that made this particular MeetUp rather enlightening.

The MeetUp featured two journalists from the Wall Street Journal, Tom McGinty and Rob Barry presenting the investigative work they did while researching [an article about the Asiana Flight 214 crash](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303330204579251191895420138.html).  A more appropriate title for the two are data-driven journalists, who instead of just investigating the normal way and having midnight meetings with DeepThroat, they actually do the work of a data scientist by finding and collecting real-world datasets and then extracting information that is then used to support their journalism. 

The most important lesson learned from this MeetUp, and the main one everyone interested in working with data should take away from this, is to be skeptical of your data, all of it, from the initial gathering of it to any conclusions or results of analayis applied on the data.  This ties in beuatifully with the whole purpose of the Data Skeptics and I have come to appreciate the work being done by the hosts. Tom and Rob really drove home this point (without necessarily being explicit about it) by demonstrating at least three times during the talk instances where they had data, or they had a conclusion, or they had some results, but then they applied some skepticism and checks only to discover it was wrong.  They even went as far as to visualize over 900 examples of the results to confirm whether it was accurate or not.  Although this sounds extreme, they did mention and drive home the point that they need to be extra sure that the results they are presenting because the Wall Street Journal is, after all, a respectable publication that has a reputation to protect.  Sadly, it appears these two journalist go through a more rigoruous scientific process than most academics go through and we can definitely use more of this healthy skepticism all over.

There were two more key points I learned from the excellent talk.  First is that there are quite a lot of very useful data (usually apparent in retrospect) that simply thrown thrown away and causes one to have to be resourceful to get all the data they might need to answer a question.  Secondly, two concepts from the "Big Data" book I read are highlighted by this talk.  The power of bringing in multiple datasets is exemplified by how Tom and Rob was able to make a lot of interesting correlations and further information by bringing in more datasets than just the first one they found.  Another key concept, perhaps one of the most important that the Big Data book stresed repeatidly and at first I thought was a questionable claim but have since grown to accept it, is that, well, here is a quote from the book, "The era of big data challenges the way we live and interact with the world. Most strikingly, society will need to shed some of its obsession for causality in exchange for simple correlations: not knowing why but only what. This overturns centuries of established practices and challenges our most basic understanding of how to make decisions and comprehend reality." (Kindle location 108 of Chapter 1)  Rob and Tom demonstrated this brave new world as evoked by the book because there were many points in the talk where, instead of looking for causation, part of their role as a journalist is to do some speculation and extra investigation on the underlying causes of some of what they reported on.  As the book repeatedily streses throughout, that yes it's true the correlation does not imply causation, but when sifting through data and investigating new ideas, it can help tremendously with the early stages of investigating a new topic.


It was exciting to see data being applied to areas we don't traditionally think of as being a Data Scientist's domain and I hope this is the future of journalism, a more fact-based approach that actually looks and provides the data to backup any reporting being done.  This is a much needed change rather than 'quicker' that we need in this world.  Whenever a major event occurs, I simply refuse to watch or read about anything beyond the intial details it in real time.  The only way 'accurate' information can come out in real time is through machines that can intelligently sift through and determine what is "truth."  Unfortuantely, incidents like the [Twitter Terror Error of 2013](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/mark-cuban/twitter-hackcrash_b_3202069.html) (I'm not talking about TWTR stock) suggests that we're a long ways from that.


*My apologies for the pay-walled article, I have contacted the author about getting a non-paywall link to share.
